# Origen, 15.1 (Homily 1 on Ps. 15)

*Homily 1 on the 15th Psalm.*

## 1

Some letters are inscribed on steles of the soul, “not with ink, but with the Spirit of the Living God” and are written not in steles[^1] made of stone nor in hearts that are stone-like, hard, and unyielding to God’s words, like that of Pharaoh, who had hardened his heart. These words here are written for a heart that is soft and yielding to the Spirit who inscribes them, a heart that is said for this reason to be “fleshly.”[^2] Because these letters are holy and inscribed in a “stele of flesh”, they cause the psalm to have the inscription, “an  inscription on a stele.”  This is why the psalm that has been read aloud has the introduction, “an inscription on a stele, for David.”    

Now if you wish to know the psalms that have an introduction[^3] mentioning a stele inscription (even if they have other content) take note that these are the 55th, 56th, the one after it, the 58th and the 59th. Our psalm here says, “an inscription on a stele, for David.”  By contrast, each of those has other additions; for example, the 55th psalm reads, “Regarding completion, for the sake of the people that was far off from the holy places; pertaining to David; for inscription on a stele; when foreigners seized him in Geth.”[^4] The 56th has,  “regarding completion; do not destroy! Pertaining to David; for inscription on a stele; when he was running away from the face of Saul into a cave.” But so that I do not go on saying what you yourselves can find and read, we note that the rest have “inscription on a stele” with other content appended to the mention of a stele inscription. Only this one has nothing in the psalm’s introduction except the mention of “inscription on a stele.” 

“You shall not make for yourself a stele [with those things] which the Lord despises.”[^5] Once you understand what’s been said, you’ll see that the one who wrote the introductions for the psalms did break the law when writing “for a stele inscription”.   Pay close attention to the Law’s wording, which says, “You shall not make for yourself a stele, [with those things] that the Lord despises.” If the passage was meant to be understood in a more simple way, it would say, “you shall not make for yourself a stele, for the Lord despises steles” or “you shall not make for yourself a stele, which the Lord despises.”  Here, however, it begins in the singular, but then continues in the plural: “you shall not make for yourself a stele, [with the things] that the Lord despises.” 

Now I consider this command to be of this sort– every person, regardless of what they are doing, is fashioning for themselves a stele. If they are not living rightly, then they are fashioning for themselves “a stele, with the things that the Lord despises,” since in their stele there is sin and the works of the flesh, like sexual immorality, impurity, indulgence, idolatry, and the rest. But if someone is living rightly, they are not acting against the law as they fashion their stele, since they are making a stele with the things that the Lord loves. The letters on the stele are one part of themselves,[^6] where what the Lord loves is written, and their life is another part of their stele, which the Lord loves. The command is not that one should avoid fashioning a stele altogether, for then David would be acting unlawfully in writing “for inscription on a stele.” Rather, we must avoid fashioning a stele with the things that the Lord despises. 

Likewise, Isaac honored Rachel with a stele on her departure from this life: “This stele at the tomb of Rachel persists to the present day.” (Gn 35:30)  He was certainly not acting contrary to the law in any fashion. Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob were taught to live by it, as the apostle says, by nature.[^7] It’s said in the apostle’s writing this way: “for when the nations that do not have a law do by nature carry out the dictations…” So guided by nature Abraham carried out the dictates of the law. Before God’s law was written down with ink, it had already been inscribed onto his heart. This is why he was found righteous as having carried out all the “dictates, judgments, and regulations of God,” as it is written in Genesis. Similarly, Jacob did not act contrary to the law in making a stele for the tomb of Rachel so that Rachel’s virtues would be on display for those who could see it.  This is enough for the present on the introduction.

## 2

Let us look now at the psalm and note first that the speaker in the psalm is our Lord Jesus Christ.  In some psalms, when we say that the character is speaking in advance for our Lord, we could be wrong or right, in that we may be contriving a solution, responding to intuition or illumination, or merely guessing.  In other psalms, we learn the identity of the speaker from the scriptures, as is the case here. In the Acts of the Apostles, it is written that the passage, “you will not abandon my soul to Hades, nor will you allow your holy one to see decay,” which occurs in this psalm, is spoken by the savior. Along with the other eleven apostles Peter understands these words this way:

> For David speaks of him,  
> ‘I beheld the Lord before me continually  
> for he is at my right hand, that I may not be shaken.  
> For this reason my heart rejoices and my tongue is glad.  
> Even my flesh shall dwell in hope  
> because you will not abandon my soul to Hades  
> nor allow your holy one to see decay.  
> You have made known to me the ways of life.  
> Before your face, you will fill me with gladness.’   
> My brothers, with certainty I may speak to you of our ancestor David that he both died and was buried and that his tomb is among us to this very day. Yet being a prophet and knowing that God had sworn an oath to him that one of his descendants would sit on his throne, he spoke with prophetic vision of the resurrection  of the Christ, that he would not be abandoned to Hades nor would his flesh see decay.” 

Clearly he says here that Jesus did not see decay and that his soul was not forsaken to Hades, though he did descend because of God’s plan, since all realms needed the presence of Christ Jesus, even those under the earth. And he went down from the place under the earth into Hades itself. For the one who ascended is the same who descended, so that he may fill all things. (Eph 4:10) Peter’s other citations in the Acts of the Apostles will make it still more clear that this psalm is spoken by our savior, Jesus Christ.  

## 3

“Protect me Lord, because I have placed my hope on you. I said to the Lord…” The savior is narrating to us his own prayer so that in narrating it he would also teach us to pray. He would pray to the Father saying, “protect me Lord,” since the savior is dependent on the Father and since God alone is entirely self-sufficient and without need of anything. Yet the savior, even if he is dependent, has an advantage, as he is dependent only upon the God of all. Moses, by comparison, when he is dependent, is dependent upon God, and Christ, and the Holy Spirit, and the angels that stand by him and help. The more lowly we are, the more we are dependent on other beings, since nothing receives its help only from God.  Now if I say that the savior is dependent and Christ is Wisdom, do not take offense at what I’ve said. I am not saying that he is dependent in precisely the same way that you or another of those who need the help of those who serve under God.[^8] Rather, I am saying that he is dependent upon the one God and Father, to whom he would pray through the prophets just as he does here. So too, in the gospels he would withdraw to lonely places and pray to God, as he was dependent upon him. 

Now, should I ever desire to carry out my prayer just like the savior, like one who is dependent only upon God, and I offer my prayer without the savior, I am praying an imperfect prayer. Even if my prayer is being sent up to God, it must be sent up through Jesus Christ, who is the high-priest and guardian of our souls. After all, the Father does not receive the prayer if I offer it without availing myself of the high-priest, since it cannot reach him without Jesus Christ offering it to him. To Jesus, God spoke with an oath: “you are a priest forever in the order of Melchizedek.” (Ps 109; Heb 5:6)  And even if our Lord needs the protection that comes from the Father, in saying “protect me Lord, for I have placed my hope on you” he is also narrating his prayer to us and saying that he has said this to the Lord himself. So he himself needs protection and would suffer who knows what without the protection of the Father. 

I can also explain this is in a way that many will found more pleasing and auspicious. How does the savior say, “protect me, Lord, for I have placed my hope on you?” I say that he says this to his Lord and father about those who are his own body parts. I’d say moreover that just as someone who prays for their own body is not praying about someone else but about themselves (for example, if I am praying about my head, I am praying about myself), similarly if I am praying for the parts of my body I am praying about myself, and this is how you should understand the savior’s words in prayer when he says, “protect me, Lord,” since “you are each the body parts of Christ” and “you are the body of Christ.”  In speaking for himself he is praying for you, for you are his body, his body part, unless you want to be separated from him. The savior is a composite being[^9] precisely for your sake. You are a composite being because you have a body inferior to the being of your soul and the nature of your spirit.    My savior and lord, by contrast, is a composite being because of the church, which is his body, and it was for her protection that he prays, saying, “protect me, Lord!” By the same logic he says refers to his body when saying all of this: “I was hungry and you gave me food to eat; I was thirsty and you gave me drink.” It’s as if I said, “If you gave food to my body, you gave it to me. If you provided drink for my body, you provided it for me.”   
Therefore, whatever we do for Christ’s body, the church, and for Christ’s body parts, our brothers and sisters, we do for Christ. After all, if we treat poorly someone who places their trust in Christ, we are treating Christ with spite, speaking ill of Christ, or neglecting Christ. If we treat them with dignity, we are treating Christ well, if we feed the one who is hungry and give drink to the one who is thirsty. Don’t then think that the stakes are merely about a person when you treat your neighbor either fairly or poorly. The stakes are over Christ himself.  Eli states in First Samuel, “if a man sins against another man, they shall pray for him. Yet if he sins against the Lord, who shall pray for him?” Do not think that you are sinning against a person, when you sin against a Christian. When you sin against a Christian, you sin against Christ. When you sin against a non-Christian, you are sinning against a person.  

 
However, you shouldn’t think it a trivial thing to sin even against a non-Christian. When you sin against a non-Christian, notice their beginning, notice God’s words in Genesis, “Let us make humanity according to our image and likeness.” If you take this out of consideration,[^10] then sinning against a Christian and sinning against a person is no longer actually sin. In this category of creatures made “in the image of the creator” are also angels, powers, and authorities.  Now if you remove from consideration sinning against a person, sinning against a brother or sister, or sinning against one made “in the image of the creator,” you may do whatever you wish to an irrational animal. Slaughter it, kill it, you’re not committing a sin against the animal. After all, the nature of sin does not extend to animals, as they lack reason. Once cannot say, “I committed injustice against an animal; I was greedy against an animal, or I did something of this sort.” And yet “the blood of your lives I shall seek from every brother and from every beast” (cf. Gen. 9:5). Therefore, you, as a person, are capable of being wronged. But by nature, an irrational animal cannot suffer wrong.
 Now that is enough of a digression on the words, “protect me, Lord.”

  

## 4
Now the reason I need to be protected by the Lord he states as, “for I have hoped in you.”  I have the confidence to say, “protect me Lord” because I have hoped in him.  I can confidently say that I need the one who says, “protect me,” that I am his body part and because of him I place my hope in God. In every season we are in fact in great need of the Lord’s protection. Whenever we are not protected, even if we are left to our own devices for just a short time, we at once fall headlong into temptations and in our abandonment we realize that the Lord has, in a certain sense, forgotten us, as we explained yesterday.  And yet, the one being tempted “will not be forgotten forever.”  Paul says, “we are pursued but not abandoned.”  We need so much protection that God commands his angels so that our feet won’t “strike against a stone” (cf. Ps 90:11–12).  



We need his protection as we go, “for the angel of the Lord will encircle around those who fear him and deliver them.”  We need angelic help so that we can say, “it is the angel of the Lord, who delivers me from every evil” (Gn. 48:16).

Yet what precisely do I mean by “angelic help” in this passage? Let’s look at the whole blessing, “May God, who has cared for me from my youth, may the angel that delivers me from every evil, bless these children!” (Gn. 48:15–16).  Who is this “angel that delivers me from every evil?” I do not believe that Michael, or Gabriel, or some other of the holy angels can deliver “from every evil.” Perhaps an angel can save us from one, or maybe from two. I’m looking for someone who can deliver us from every evil and has the authority to bless Ephraim and Manasseh. So who is this angel “who delivers from every evil?” Christ Jesus, whose “name is called the angel of great counsel” (Is. 9:5, LXX).    

Do not suspect me of demeaning Christ when I call him an angel, just as I do not demean him when I call him a human being for your sake, even though humans are below angels. Out of his love for mankind, he did not consider his equality with God as something to be exploited, but became a human being in status, humbled himself, and became obedient to the point of death, even death on a cross. This same love for the angels made it necessary for him also to become an angel. Just as by becoming a human he imparted beauty on the human race (we would not enjoy such beauty or perfection had Christ not become a person), so too God’s Christ imparted beauty on what was lacking in the angelic race by becoming an angel and thereby also brought to perfection what was lacking in their race. God’s Christ imparted beauty on every angel by becoming an angel and imparted this beauty simply by being God. For he had received his beauty by becoming God from the divinity of the Father. 



## 5

“You are my Lord, because you do not need my good.”  Now “there are many gods,” the apostle says, “and many lords,” (1 Cor 8:5), yet even if there are many gods, for us there is “one God, the Father, from whom all things exist and for whom we exist.”  And even if there are may lords, for us “there is one Lord, Jesus Christ, through whom all things exist and through we we exist”  (1 Cor 8:6). Among these many gods are those to whom the scripture says, “I have said, ‘you are gods’” ( Ps 81:6 and Jn 10:34).  And though there are many lords, there is one particular Lord that even the Savior names as Lord by calling him Father, who has something unique  from all other lords. Other lords need the goods brought to them by their subjects. This Lord alone has no need of any good thing from anyone over whom he presides.  The savior thus refers to this special quality of his Lord, the Father, “I have said the Lord, ‘you are my lord, because you do not need my goods.’” 

I’ll begin from lower affairs so that you can understand the principles of the passage. The master depends upon the goodness of his slave, that he serve good-heartedly.  He needs the service of his slave because as a person he cannot be self-sufficient without the service that he needs, like the slave’s farming, household administration, or the serving of meals that comes from the slave. The human master cannot say to his slave, “I do not need your good service” nor can the slave say to his master (since his master is not God), “you do not need my good service,” since a human being as needs. Now that you understand how in the case of human beings a master needs his slave’s good qualities and service, return to the scripture and notice that the other masters that the apostle speaks of need good service, which is also the case in the passage, “ the slaves of their masters let them serve their masters.”  

Now I will say that another lord needs my good service, even if I am not so exalted as to be directly under the savior or the Lord God. It is only the God of All that hears from the savior, “you are my Lord, because you do not need my good service,” which is to say, “you are my Lord because you do not need my good service.”

## 6 
 Let us suppose you need my goods; notice what follows: “he displayed marvels to the holy ones in his land.”  The Father does not show marvelous things to everyone, but only to those who are holy, and not when they are outside his land, but only when they are in it. If you are able to go up to the true land, which God has promised, the land of which this Judaea on earth was a symbol, go up to it and you will see that you have not yet arrived in the land that is true land, in the land that is truly expansive, in the land that truly flows with milk and honey. You’ll see that you have not yet arrived in the inheritance of the gentle, as our savior says of them, “blessed are the gentle, for they will inherit the land.”  You are not yet seeing God’s marvels.  Even if you think you are seeing wonders like those that people in the time of Moses saw and like Moses himself saw, you are seeing wonders from the outside of God’s land, through a mirror darkly, not the wonders that are face to face.  

Persistently pursue the sight of God’s wonders! Who arrives in God’s land? Is it not the one who has left the land of Egypt? Who has become worthy through  their limbs not falling in the desert? Who has not committed the sins made by those who went out from the land of Egypt before reaching the holy land? If you want to arrive in the holy land and see God’s wonders, become a Caleb, son of Jephunneh, become a Joshua son of Nun, an Eleazar the Priest, a zealous Phineas, son of Eleazar the priest! That is how you will arrive in the land and see God’s wonders. 

The scripture certainly is daring here, quite daring in fact, in that it has the potential cause trouble for someone unless they have contemplated the matter in its entirety. The people saw God’s wonders in the plain of Tanis.[^11] How could it then be true that he “displayed marvels to the holy ones in his land?”  The people saw God’s marvels in the desert, which are written down in Exodus, Leviticus, and Numbers.  How could it be true that God especially “displayed his wonders to the holy ones in his land?” Yet if you consider the miracle that occurred through Joshua in the holy land, at a point when they were no longer still to inherit the land, you will see that there is no comparing the miracle in the holy land with the miracles in Egypt, those in the plain of Tanis, or those in the desert.

Similarly, if you compare the inheritance that came through Moses to that which came through Joshua, you’ll see that Joshua’s inheritance was far more majestic than Moses’s inheritance. The inheritance that came through Moses was on both sides of the Jordan and for the tribes that had lots of cattle, Gad, Reuben, and half of the tribe of Mannasseh. They received no further inheritance through Joshua, which went instead to the royal tribe of Judah, the tribe of Ephraim, and the rest of the tribes, like the tribe of Benjamin, where the temple of God was. So then, when the inheritances are compared you see the great difference, and why “he displayed marvels to the holy ones in his land.”  

If you would like to understand in a different way how God, “displayed marvels to those in his land,” but did not display marvels to those outside his land, then take God’s land figuratively to refer to the church. If you are within the bounds of the church, you’ll delight in God’s marvels. Yet if you leave the bounds of the church (and you do this however much you commit sin), then you are not tasting God’s marvels. That is why it says, “The Lord displayed marvelously all his plans among them.”  Who are the “them” here? Those in God’s land. He does not say that he displayed some of his plans in them, but didn’t others.

Now in the second explanation, “all of God’s plans” are revealed to those standing in the church, while in the first “all of God’s plans” are shown to those in the holy land, where the Lord “displayed his marvelous plans.”  In either case, his plans were not yet made revealed in their perfection or entirety. After all, not all of God’s plans are present before they reach the holy land. Listen to the scripture, “we know in part and prophesy in part” (1 Cor 13:9). How then could someone who knows in part have “all of God’s plans” within them? It seems likely that “all of God’s plans” are present “when perfection comes and the partial is abolished” (1 Cor 13:10). That is why he says also, “The Lord made known *all of his marvelous plans* to those in his land within them.”  

## 7

[^1]:	Perrone writes, οὐκ ἐν πλαξὶ λιθίναις [στήλαις] (suppressing στήλαις, steles,  in favor of πλαξί, tablets). It seems to me slightly more likely that πλαξί has intruded inappropriately from 2 Cor 3:3 (which Origen has just cited) and should be suppressed instead (I’d print: οὐκ ἐν [πλαξὶ] λιθίναις στήλαις).  

[^2]:	Perrone conjectures καὶ μ\<έντοι\> διὰ τοῦτο σαρκίνην (the bits after καὶ are unclear in the text. I suggest instead that the scribe (and Origen) wrote instead καὶ λεγομένην διὰ τοῦτο σαρκινήν, and have translated so above.

[^3]:	The traditional term in English for the small introductions to the Psalms is “inscription” (In Greek, ἐπιγραφή). Unhelpfully we have overlap in English between literary unit (psalm introduction as “inscription”) . I have opted here instead to translate with the more general term “introduction” to decrease ambiguity.   

[^4]:	The inscriptions of the Psalms are notoriously tricky to interpret. I have followed a few suggestions from Albert Piertsma’s translation of the Greek Psalms in [](http://ccat.sas.upenn.edu/nets/edition/24-ps-nets.pdf "the New English Translation of the Septuagint.")

[^5]:	The ambiguity of the passage from Greek Deuteronomy is difficult to bring out in English. I have supplied in brackets English words which are consistent with how Origen interprets the package but are only latent in the Greek. Origen’s bible reads, οὐ ποιήσεις σεαυτῷ στήλην, ἃ ἐμίσησε κύριος.  Origen here carefully notes the discrepancy between στήλην (a feminine singular noun) and the connecting relative pronoun ἅ (a neuter plural). He thus interprets the antecedent of the relative pronoun not as στήλην (if this were the case we’d expect ἥν) but supplies something like τούτοις or αὐτοῖς. 

[^6]:	I have followed the manuscript in punctuation  after καὶ αἱ ἐπιστολαὶ τῆς στήλης and taken ἑαυτοῦ as subordinate μέρος.  

[^7]:	\<TE\> I place a full-stop after παρὰ τῷ ἀποστόλῳ αὐτὸν φύσει, instead of a comma.

[^8]:	That is, ‘people’ who need the help of the angles that serve at God’s command. 

[^9]:	That is, the 

[^10]:	Origen’s basic assumption in the passage is that sin can only be committed against creature that possess reason. For Origen, to be created in God’s image is to be endowed with the capacity for reason. Rational creatures include not only humanity, but also angelic beings. Were humans not to be created in God’s image, there would be no sin, he argues. 

[^11]:	See Ps. 77:43 (Tanis is named as Zoan in the Hebrew Bible).